docs:#606 AlterPartitionAssignments and ListPartitionReassignments (#1168)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-balancing.mdx

| Setting      | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| `node_add`      | Partition balancing happens when nodes are added.  <br /><br />This is the default setting.|
| `continuous`   | In this mode, Redpanda continuously monitors the cluster for node failures and high disk usage. It uses this information to automatically redistribute partitions across the cluster to maintain optimal performance and availability. It also monitors rack availability after failures, and for a given partition, it tries to move excess replicas from racks that have more than one replica to racks where there are none. See [Configure Continuous Data Balancing](../continuous-data-balancing).<br /><br />This option requires an Enterprise license.     |
| `off`     | All partition balancing from Redpanda is turned off. <br /><br />This option is not recommended for production clusters. Only set to `off` if you need to move partitions manually.   |

> ## Kafka partition balancing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Partition balancing with the Kafka API
```

As an alternative to Redpanda partition balancing, you can change partition assignments explicitly with the Kafka API or with any 3rd-party tool in the Kafka ecosystem that controls partition movement using the Kafka API. 

To reassign partitions with the Kafka API:

> 1. Set the `partition_autobalancing_mode` property to `off`. If Redpanda partition balancing is enabled, Redpanda may change partition assignments regardless of an `AlterPartitionReassignments` request.

Reviewer: Since we don't show `AlterPartitionReassignments` in the examples, let's remove that from here.

```suggestion
1. Set the `partition_autobalancing_mode` property to `off`. If Redpanda partition balancing is enabled, Redpanda may change partition assignments regardless of what you do through the Kafka API.
```

  Current partition replica assignment

  {"version":1,"partitions":[{"topic":"foo","partition":1,"replicas":[1,2,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]},{"topic":"foo","partition":2,"replicas":[3,1,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]}]}

  Save this to use as the --reassignment-json-file option during rollback
  Successfully started partition reassignments for foo-1,foo-2
  ```

5. Verify that the reassignment is complete with the flags `--verify --preserve-throttles`: 

  ```bash
  kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --verify --preserve-throttles
  Status of partition reassignment:
  Reassignment of partition foo-1 is complete.
  Reassignment of partition foo-2 is complete.
  ```

  Alternatively, run `rpk` again to show your reassigned replica sets:

  ```bash
  rpk topic describe foo -p
  PARTITION  LEADER  EPOCH  REPLICAS  LOG-START-OFFSET  HIGH-WATERMARK
  0          3       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  1          2       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  2          2       1      [1 2 3]   0                 0
  ```  

> ### AlterPartitionReassignments in Redpanda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Differences in partition balancing between Redpanda and Kafka
```

> - Kafka comes with a shell script to issue `AlterPartitionReassignments` requests: `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh`. This script attempts to use throttle configurations that Redpanda does not support, such as `replica.alter.log.dirs.io.max.bytes.per.second`. Include the flag `--preserve-throttles` to avoid errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Kafka comes with a shell script to issue partition reassignments: `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh`. This script attempts to use throttle configurations that Redpanda does not support, such as `replica.alter.log.dirs.io.max.bytes.per.second`. Include the flag `--preserve-throttles` to avoid errors.
```

> - Kafka supports `AlterPartitionReassignments` requests to upreplicate or dereplicate a topic partition. Redpanda currently doesn't support this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Kafka supports uprelication or dereplication via partition reassignments. Redpanda currently doesn't support this.
```

> - An `AlterPartitionReassignments` request lists the IDs for each replica. Kafka validates the node ID for any new replica (that wasn't in the previous replica set) against the list of alive nodes. Redpanda validates all replicas against the list of alive nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In a partition reassignment, users must provide the node ID for each replica. Kafka validates the node ID for any new replica (that wasn't in the previous replica set) against the list of alive nodes. Redpanda validates all replicas against the list of alive nodes.
```

> - Redpanda supports shard-level partition assignments. Therefore, when resolving an `AlterPartitionReassignments` request, Redpanda automatically determines the shard placements. If you want a topic-partition on a specific shard, you must use the Admin API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Redpanda supports shard-level partition assignments. Therefore, when resolving a partition reassignment, Redpanda automatically determines the shard placements. If you want a topic-partition on a specific shard, you must use the Admin API.
```

> - When there are two identical `AlterPartitionReassignments` requests, Redpanda rejects one of them with the error `no_reassignment_in_progress`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When there are two identical partition reassignment requests, Redpanda rejects one of them with the error `no_reassignment_in_progress`.
```

  ```bash
  kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --execute
  Current partition replica assignment

  {"version":1,"partitions":[{"topic":"foo","partition":1,"replicas":[1,2,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]},{"topic":"foo","partition":2,"replicas":[3,1,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]}]}

  Save this to use as the --reassignment-json-file option during rollback
  Successfully started partition reassignments for foo-1,foo-2
  ```

5. Verify that the reassignment is complete with the flags `--verify --preserve-throttles`: 

  ```bash
  kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --verify --preserve-throttles
  Status of partition reassignment:
  Reassignment of partition foo-1 is complete.
  Reassignment of partition foo-2 is complete.
  ```

  :::note
  For details on why `--preserve-throttles` is necessary, see the section "Differences between Redpanda and Kafka".
  :::

>   Alternatively, run `rpk` again to show verify your reassigned replica sets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Alternatively, run `rpk` again to show your reassigned replica sets:
```

| Setting      | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| `node_add`      | Partition balancing happens when nodes are added.  <br /><br />This is the default setting.|
| `continuous`   | In this mode, Redpanda continuously monitors the cluster for node failures and high disk usage. It uses this information to automatically redistribute partitions across the cluster to maintain optimal performance and availability. It also monitors rack availability after failures, and for a given partition, it tries to move excess replicas from racks that have more than one replica to racks where there are none. See [Configure Continuous Data Balancing](../continuous-data-balancing).<br /><br />This option requires an Enterprise license.     |
| `off`     | All partition balancing from Redpanda is turned off. <br /><br />This option is not recommended for production clusters. Only set to `off` if you need to move partitions manually.   |

## Manual partition balancing

As an alternative to Redpanda partition balancing, there are several other ways you can balance the load across the brokers.

### rpk

You can move partitions between nodes with `rpk`:

```bash
rpk redpanda replicate

> ```

Reviewer: I am not familiar with `rpk redpanda replicate`. Perhaps @twmb or someone from the rpk team would be better for this section?

Reviewer 2: @r-vasquez does this exist? I've never heard of replicate.

Reviewer 3: No, that command does not exist. And I don't think we have an rpk command to manually move partitions, we only have:

```
$ rpk cluster partitions 
Manage cluster partitions

Usage:
  rpk cluster partitions [command]

Available Commands:
  balancer-status Queries cluster for partition balancer status
  movement-cancel Cancel ongoing partition movements
```

Author: thank you: I've removed the section about rpk redpanda replicate

### Kafka API

> For on-premise implementations, you can change partition assignments explicitly with the Kafka API or with any 3rd-party tool in the Kafka ecosystem that controls partition movement using the Kafka API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change partition assignments explicitly with the Kafka API or with any 3rd-party tool in the Kafka ecosystem that controls partition movement using AlterPartitionReassignments requests. 
```

"on-premise" should not matter.

Author: @NyaliaLui I thought we needed to document that users couldn't issue AlterPartitionAssignments via the Kafka API for clusters in the cloud. No?

Author: I've rewritten that as: 
"As an alternative to Redpanda partition balancing, you can change partition assignments explicitly with the Kafka API or with any 3rd-party tool in the Kafka ecosystem that controls partition movement using the Kafka API. "

Reviewer: I am unaware of any cloud implications at the moment; however, any AlterPartitionReassignment request to a broker should work regardless if it is on-premises or in cloud.

With that said, your alternative is good for me so I will resolve this comment thread.

To reassign partitions with the Kafka API:

1. Set the `partition_autobalancing_mode` property to `off`.

  If Redpanda partition balancing is enabled, Redpanda may change partition assignments regardless of an `AlterPartitionReassignments` request.

> 1. Show initial replica sets:
> 
>   ```bash
>   kafka-topics.sh --describe --topic foo --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095
>   Topic: foo	TopicId: rGuGLk-4QN6GFjvDy-R3zA	PartitionCount: 3	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: 
>     	Topic: foo	Partition: 0	Leader: 2	Replicas: 2,3,1	Isr: 2,3,1
>     	Topic: foo	Partition: 1	Leader: 3	Replicas: 3,1,0	Isr: 3,1,0
> 	    Topic: foo	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 1,0,2
>   ```

Reviewer: Let's use rpk to show the current replica sets

```suggestion
1. Show initial replica sets for topic `foo` with `rpk`
```bash
rpk topic describe foo -p
PARTITION  LEADER  EPOCH  REPLICAS  LOG-START-OFFSET  HIGH-WATERMARK
0          1       1      [1 2 3]   0                 645
1          1       1      [0 1 2]   0                 682
2          3       1      [0 1 3]   0                 672
```
```

> 3. Run alter partitions with `kcl`. This example requires replicas on each node for partitions 0-2.
> 
>   ```bash
>   kcl -X seed_brokers=localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --no-config-file admin partas alter 'foo:0->0,1,2,3;1->0,1,2,3;2->0,1,2,3'
>   foo   2     OK    
>   foo   0     OK    
>   foo   1     OK    
>   ```

Reviewer: Many Kafka customers use `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` to issue partition reassignments, so that is the script we should show in docs for now.

```suggestion
2. We need to put all partition reassignments in a json file before we issue the request. For example, suppose we want to replace node 0 with another in the replica sets of partitions 1 and 2. The json file would look like:
```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "partitions": [
    {
      "topic": "foo",
      "partition": 1,
      "replicas": [
        3,
        1,
        2
      ]
    },
    {
      "topic": "foo",
      "partition": 2,
      "replicas": [
        2,
        1,
        3
      ]
    }
  ]
}

```

3. We can execute partition reassignments with the `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` script where `example.json` is the name of the json file we created in step 2
```bash
kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --execute
Current partition replica assignment

{"version":1,"partitions":[{"topic":"foo","partition":1,"replicas":[1,2,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]},{"topic":"foo","partition":2,"replicas":[3,1,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]}]}

Save this to use as the --reassignment-json-file option during rollback
Successfully started partition reassignments for foo-1,foo-2
```
```

> 

Reviewer: Then a step for executing the reassignment

```
4. We can execute partition reassignments with the `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` script where `example.json` is the name of the json file we created in step 3
```bash
kafka-reassign-partitions.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file example.json --execute
Current partition replica assignment

{"version":1,"partitions":[{"topic":"foo","partition":1,"replicas":[1,2,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]},{"topic":"foo","partition":2,"replicas":[3,1,0],"log_dirs":["any","any","any"]}]}

Save this to use as the --reassignment-json-file option during rollback
Successfully started partition reassignments for foo-1,foo-2
```
```

> 4. Show new replica sets:
> 
>   ```bash
>   kafka-topics.sh --describe --topic foo --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095
>   Topic: foo	TopicId: rGuGLk-4QN6GFjvDy-R3zA	PartitionCount: 3	ReplicationFactor: 4	Configs: 
>       Topic: foo	Partition: 0	Leader: 2	Replicas: 0,1,2,3	Isr: 2,3,1,0
> 	    Topic: foo	Partition: 1	Leader: 3	Replicas: 0,1,2,3	Isr: 3,1,0,2
> 	    Topic: foo	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 0,1,2,3	Isr: 1,0,2,3
>   ```

Reviewer: Then a step to verify the reassignment completed
```suggestion
5. We can check if the reassignment is complete with the flags `--verify --preserve-throttles`. For details on why `--preserve-throttles` is necessary, see the section "Differences between Redpanda and Kafka".
```bash
kafka-reassign-partitions --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095 --reassignment-json-file sample.json --verify --preserve-throttles
Status of partition reassignment:
Reassignment of partition foo-1 is complete.
Reassignment of partition foo-2 is complete.
```
```

> 

Reviewer: Finally, a step to use `rpk` for  verification
```md
6. Alternatively, you could run `rpk` again to verify the replica sets

rpk topic describe foo -p
PARTITION  LEADER  EPOCH  REPLICAS  LOG-START-OFFSET  HIGH-WATERMARK
0          3       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
1          2       2      [1 2 3]   0                 0
2          2       1      [1 2 3]   0                 0
```

### Admin API

You can manually assign partitions at topic creation with the Admin API: 

```bash
kafka-topics.sh --create --bootstrap-server 127.0.0.1:9092 --topic custom-assignment --replica-assignment 0:1:2,0:1:2,0:1:2 

> ```

Reviewer: Assigning partitions at topic creation time is:
1) Not necessarily about partition balancing so perhaps it should not go in this section about partition balancing
2) Is different from using the AlterPartitionReassignments API so perhaps @mmaslankaprv may know more about this.

> ```

Reviewer: I do not know where on this page this should go, but we should include a section on the differences between our implementation and Kafka's. Here is the list of differences I have now, it will likely be updated over the next few days. For more context, see [this slack thread](https://redpandadata.slack.com/archives/C04AVDG7N58/p1675807169036569?thread_ts=1675804758.947049&cid=C04AVDG7N58).

1. With Kafka, users can issue AlterPartitionReassignments requests to upreplicate or dereplicate a topic partition. However, this is currently unsupported in Redpanda.

2. Redpanda supports shard-level partition assignments. Therefore, when resolving an AlterPartitionReassignments request, Redpanda will automatically determine the shard placements. If users want a topic-partition on a specific shard, they will need to go through the Admin API

3. Kafka comes with a shell script to issue AlterPartitionReassignments requests, `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh`. This script will attempt to use some throttle configs that Redpanda does **not** support, such as `replica.alter.log.dirs.io.max.bytes.per.second`. Therefore, it is important to use the flag `--preserve-throttles` so the script does **not** attempt to change those configs. Otherwise `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` may report errors.

4. An AlterPartitionReassignment request lists the ids for each replica. Kafka will validate the node id for **any new replica** (one that is not in the previous replica set) against the list of alive nodes. Redpanda will validate **all replicas** against the list of alive nodes

5. In a scenario where there are two identical AlterPartitionReassignment requests. Redpanda will reject one of them with the error `no_reassignment_in_progress`

| ----------- | ----------- |
| `node_add`      | Partition balancing happens when nodes are added.  <br /><br />This is the default setting.|
| `continuous`   | In this mode, Redpanda continuously monitors the cluster for node failures and high disk usage. It uses this information to automatically redistribute partitions across the cluster to maintain optimal performance and availability. It also monitors rack availability after failures, and for a given partition, it tries to move excess replicas from racks that have more than one replica to racks where there are none. See [Continuous Data Balancing](../continuous-data-balancing).<br /><br />This option requires an Enterprise license.         |
| `off`     | All partition balancing from Redpanda is turned off. <br /><br />This option is not recommended for production clusters. Only set to `off` if you need to move partitions manually.   |

## Manual partition balancing

> As an alternative to Redpanda partition balancing, there are several other ways you can to balance the load across the brokers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As an alternative to Redpanda partition balancing, there are several other ways you can balance the load across the brokers.
```

### rpk

> You can move partitions between nodes with rpk: `rpk redpanda replicate`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe put in bash tag so a user can copy?

If not, maybe rewrite as:
You can move partitions between nodes using the `rpk redpanda replicate` command.

Author: I put in bash tag.

### Kafka API

For on-premise implementations, you can change partition assignments explicitly with the Kafka API or with any 3rd-party tool in the Kafka ecosystem that controls partition movement using the Kafka API. 

To reassign partitions with the Kafka API:

1. Set the `partition_autobalancing_mode` property to `off`.

  If Redpanda partition balancing is enabled, Redpanda may change partition assignments regardless of an `AlterPartitionReassignments` request.

1. Show initial replica sets:

  ```bash
  kafka-topics.sh --describe --topic foo --bootstrap-server localhost:9092,localhost:9093,localhost:9094,localhost:9095
  Topic: foo	TopicId: rGuGLk-4QN6GFjvDy-R3zA	PartitionCount: 3	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: 
    	Topic: foo	Partition: 0	Leader: 2	Replicas: 2,3,1	Isr: 2,3,1
    	Topic: foo	Partition: 1	Leader: 3	Replicas: 3,1,0	Isr: 3,1,0
	    Topic: foo	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 1,0,2
  ```

> 3. Run alter partitions with kcl. This example requires replicas on each node for partitions 0-2.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Run alter partitions with `kcl`. This example requires replicas on each node for partitions 0-2.
```
